---
metaTags:
  {
    fbAppId: '2346v25462b4bs45yb45n',
    pageTitle: 'Unveiling the React Rendering Cycle: Loading and Displaying Components',
    metaDescription: 'Discover how React applications load and display components in the browser through the intricate rendering cycle. Learn about the role of ReactDOM, the Virtual DOM, and component lifecycle methods in initializing, rendering, and updating UI elements. Explore the optimization techniques that enable React to efficiently manage changes and provide a seamless user experience.',
    keywords: 'React rendering cycle, component loading, UI display, ReactDOM, Virtual DOM, component lifecycle, optimization techniques, web development, user interface, React application.',
    externalScripts: 'something?',
    ogType: '',
    ogUrl: '',
    ogTitle: '',
    ogDescription: '',
    ogImage: '',
    ogLocale: '',
    ogVideo: '',
    ogVideoUrl: '',
    ogVideoSecureUrl: '',
    ogVideoType: '',
    ogVideoWidth: '',
    ogVideoHeight: '',
    ogImageUrl: '',
    ogImageSecureUrl: '',,
    ogImageType: '',
    ogImageWidth: '',
    ogImageHeight: '',
    twCard: '',
    twSite: '',
    twCreator: '',
  }

type: tip
id: ahsyh8k8a3f23d4tii5dr6p42ds9of4d
title: Unveiling the React Rendering Cycle - Loading and Displaying Components
urlName: unveiling-the-react-rendering-cycle-loading-and-displaying-components
timestamp: 1690048990
description: Discover how React applications load and display components in the browser through the intricate rendering cycle. Learn about the role of ReactDOM, the Virtual DOM, and component lifecycle methods in initializing, rendering, and updating UI elements. Explore the optimization techniques that enable React to efficiently manage changes and provide a seamless user experience.
image: ../../../assets/images/raster/react.png
alternativeText: js icon
relatedTechnologies: [ 'javascript']
similarContentIds:
  [
    'wm478vt43t9m04c9m34vadg',
    'wm478vt43t9m04dsfc9m34v',
    'wm478vt43t9mrtywtrw04c9m34v',
  ]
---

React Apps load and display components in the browser through a process called the React rendering cycle. This cycle involves several steps that React follows to initialize, render, and update components in the Document Object Model (DOM) of a web page.

Here's a high-level overview of how React loads and displays components in the browser:

<b>Component Definition and Imports:</b>

- Components are defined using JavaScript functions or classes. Each component encapsulates a specific piece of UI and logic. Components may import other components, libraries, or resources required for their functionality.

<b>Entry Point (index.js):</b>

- The React application starts at the entry point, usually the index.js file. In the index.js file, you import the ReactDOM library and your main component (e.g., App).

<b>ReactDOM.render():</b>

- The ReactDOM.render() method is called with the main component (e.g., App ) and a DOM element (often with an id of "root"). This method transforms the React component into HTML elements using JSX and inserts them into the specified DOM element.

<b>Component Initialization:</b>

- When a component is rendered for the first time, its constructor is called (if it's a class component) or the function body is executed (if it's a functional component). Initial state, props, and context are set up.

<b>Render Phase:</b>

- The render method of each component is called to create a virtual representation (Virtual DOM) of the UI based on the current state and props. React compares the current Virtual DOM with the previous one to identify differences (referred to as the reconciliation process).

<b>DOM Update:</b>

- React calculates the minimal set of changes needed to update the real DOM and applies those changes efficiently. Only the necessary parts of the real DOM are updated, improving performance.

<b>Component Lifecycle Methods (Class Components):</b>

- If the component is a class component, various lifecycle methods (e.g., componentDidMount componentDidUpdate) may be invoked during the process.

<b>Re-rendering and Updates:</b>

- Changes in state, props, or context trigger a re-render of the component. The entire rendering cycle repeats, but React optimizes updates by minimizing direct manipulation of the DOM.

<b>Unmounting (Optional):</b>

- If a component is removed from the UI, its componentWillUnmount (for class components) or cleanup code (for functional components with Hooks) is executed.

<b>Complete Rendering:</b>

- The complete UI is displayed in the browser based on the rendered components and their hierarchy.

This process of rendering and updating components allows React to efficiently manage changes to the UI while providing a smooth user experience. The Virtual DOM, diffing algorithm, and other optimizations contribute to React's ability to update the UI with minimal impact on performance.
